     Planetary protection, astrobiology and 
     the search for extraterrestrial life
        Petra  Rettberg
        DLR, Institute for Aerospace Medicine, Cologne, Germany
        petra.Rettberg@dlr.de
           Planetary protection and astrobiology
           •   Astrobiology is the study of the origin, 
               evolution and distribution of life in the 
               universe.
           •   The search for signs of extraterrestrial 
               life is one major driver for solar system 
               exploration. 
           •   A multidiciplinary approach!e search 
               for extraterrestrial life is an 
               important driver for the exploration 
               of our solar system.
           The search for extraterrestrial life is an 
           important driver for the exploration of 
           our solar system.
  2
          Astrobiology
          •   How and when did life on Earth begin? 
          •   What were the environmental conditions at that time 
              on Earth?
          •   Are there other habitable environments in our solar 
              system and beyond?
          •   Are other habitable environments inhabited? 
          •   …
          →Is the emergence of life the consequence of an 
              extraordinary set of evolutionary processes or is life a 
              general principle? 
  3
      What is life?
 4
        Requirements for life as we know it
         •  Liquid water
         •  Chemical elements 
            (CHNOPS + others)
                                                                    From:The Planetary Society
         •  Energy source 
            (chemical or light)
 5
      Habitability
      • Habitability is the measure of a planet's or moon’s 
        potential to develop and maintain environments 
        hospitable to life.
      • Environments do not need to contain life to be 
        considered habitable.
      • Understanding planetary habitability is an 
        extrapolation of the conditions on Earth, as this is 
        the only planet known to support life.
      • On the early Earth, ~ 3.4 billion years ago, the 
        environmental conditions were quite different from 
        the actual conditions.
 6
          Planets and moons of astrobiological interest in our solar system 
            •   Prebiotic chemistry
            •   Search for past or present signs of extraterrestrial life
                                                 Earth, Mars, Europa, Enceladus, Titan …
  7
         Present Mars
           •  Is there extinct or extant Martian life?
                   solar UV radiation (≥ 200 nm), no shielding by ozone layer 
                   cosmic ionizing radiation, no shielding by magnetic field
                    
                    
                                                                                                                   surface
                   anoxic conditions
                   low pressure (~ 7 - 10 hPa)                    desiccation                                      p, T
                   low average temperature (~ -65°C)
                                                                                                                 subsurface
  8
          Present Mars
          •   Water ice at the poles
          •   Frozen water in the subsurface
          •   Temporary brines on the surface?
          •   Liquid water in the subsurface?
                             This image combining orbital imagery with 3-D 
                            modeling shows flows that appear in spring and 
                            summer on a slope inside Mars' Newton crater.
                            (Image: © NASA/JPL-Caltech/Univ. of Arizona)
  9
       NASA ESA Mars Sample Return progam
                                                                    Mars Ascent 
                                                                      Vehicle
                                    Earth Return 
         Ingenuity                     Orbiter
                                                                                    Sample 
                                                                                    Retrieval 
                                                                                    Lander
                       Perseverance
 1010
       Mars samples collected by the Perseverance rover
       Mars Rock Samples - NASA Science
        at 1574 sols (July 24, 2025)
 1111            By Courtesy NASA/JPL-Caltech, Attribution, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=170682645
       A potential biosignature in one of the Perseverance samples
       A potential biosignature is a substance or structure that might have a biological origin, but requires more 
       data or further study before a conclusion can be reached about the absence or presence of life. 
                                                                 „Leopard and poppy seeds“ 
                                                                 spots on a reddish rock 
                                                                 nicknamed „Cheyava Falls“ in 
                                                                 Mars‘ Jezero Crater indicate 
                                                                 that the chemical reactions in 
                                                                 this rock could have supported 
                                                                 microbial life, other 
                                                                 explanations are being 
                                                                 considered.
                                                                 Sample M2020-1215-28 
                                                                 Sapphire Canyon
                    Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS
 1212
      A potential biosignature in one of the Perseverance samples from 
      NASA’s Mars 2020 mission
                                                332 | Nature | Vol 645 | 11 September 2025
 1313
      A variety of organic molecules in one of the Curiosity samples from 
      NASA's Mars Science Laboratory mission
 1414
      NASA ESA Mars Sample Return progam
 1515
      Robotic Mars missions – ExoMars (ESA)
           ESA‘s ExoMars 2016 mission with     ESA‘s ExoMars 2028 mission with 
               the Trace Gas orbiter              the rover Rosalind Franklin
                                   Credit: ESA
 16
      Martian Moons eXploration mission – MMX, JAXA, Japan
      Investigation of Phobos and Deimos
      Sample return from Phobos
      Launch 2026, tbc
 17
      Mars sample return mission – Tianwen-3 from CNSA, China
      Launch in 2028, tbc, Mars samples on Earth in 2031, tbc
                               Tainwen-3 Mars Sample Return (China) 
                            Hou et. al. (2025). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-025-02572-0
 18
          Mars sample return mission – Tianwen-3 from CNSA, China
            Schematic overview of China’s MSR mission 
                                                                                                •   Lander with drilling and 
                                                                                                    scooping payloads for 
                                                                                                    biosignature analysis
                                                                                                •   Drone for rock sampling at 
                                                                                                    remote locations 
                                                                                                •   All samples ascend to the 
                                                                                                    orbiter. 
                                                                                                Hou et. al. (2025). 
                                                                                                https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-025-02572-0
 19
      Mars sample return mission – Tianwen-3 from CNSA, China
             Image credit: CCTV/Inside Outer Space
                                                   Image credit: EPA-EFE/CNSA
 20
       Icy moons 
                          Europa                               Enceladus
 21
          JUICE (ESA)
          JUpiter ICy moons Explorer
          •   launch in 2023
          •   arrival at Jupiter in 2029 
          →observations of the giant gaseous planet Jupiter 
              and three of its largest moons, Ganymede, 
              Callisto and Europa.
                                                                                                          Credit: ESA
 22
          Europa Clipper (NASA)
         •   Launch October 2024
         •   Arrival at Jupiter in 2030
         •   Nearly 50 flybys of Europa
         •   “Europa Clipper’s main science goal is 
             to determine whether there are places 
             below the surface of Jupiter’s icy moon, 
             Europa, that could support life.” 
                                                                                              Credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech
 23
       Several international space missions are exploring the solar system 
       to search for signs of life. 
        •  How can we identify unambiguously extraterrestrial signs of life?
        •  How can we avoid the unintentional contamination of other planets and moons of 
           astrobiological interest?
            → Planetary protection!
 24
       Challenges in the identification of extraterrestrial life
                                      Measurement      Measurement 
                                      with negative     with positve 
                                         results          results
                                                                             Contamination
                     No signs of life     True            False 
                       in a sample       negative        positive
                      Signs of life in                     True            Planetary protection
                        a sample         False           positive
                                        negative
             Wrong approach or 
               lack of sensitivity
 2525
            Legal framework for planetary protection
            •   The legal basis for planetary protection was 
                established in Article IX of the United Nations 
                Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of 
                States in the Exploration and Use of Outer 
                Space, including the Moon and other Celestial 
                Bodies (Outer Space Treaty, 1967).
            •   COSPAR (Committee of Space Research) 
                maintains the Policy on Planetary Protection* to 
                guide compliance with the Outer Space Treaty for 
                the reference of spacefaring nations as an 
                international voluntary and non-legally binding 
                standard for the avoidance of organic-constituent 
                and biological contamination introduced by 
                planetary missions.
                                                                                                     As of October 2025, 118 countries are parties to the 
                *see website of COSPAR‘s Panel on Planetary Protection,                            treaty, while another 20 have signed the treaty but have 
                COSPAR Policy on Planetary Protection, 7 November 2025                                            not completed ratification.
 2626
           What planetary protection is not!
            •   It is not about asteroid defense.
                  →Covered in the Near Earth Objects (NEO) and                                                                   Fireball 
                                                                                                                                 exploded above 
                      Space Situational  Awareness (SSA) programs                                                                Chelyabinsk city 
                                                                                                                                 in the morning 
                                                                                                                                 of 15 Feb. 2013
            •   It is not about space debris.
                  →Covered in the Space Surveillance and Tracking 
                      (SST), space debris, and sustainability programs
                                                                                                                               Space Debris Image: ESA
            •   It is not about cultural or natural world heritage.
                  →Covered by UNESCO based on a convention (for 
                                                                                                                                      Credit: 
                      Earth) and the COSPAR Panel on Exploration                                                                      NASA/Mars 
                                                                                                                                      Exploration 
                      (for space)                                                                                                     Rover
 2727
         Rationales for COSPAR‘s planetary protection policy and 
         associated requirements
         •  The conduct of scientific investigations of possible 
            extraterrestrial life forms, precursors, and 
            remnants must not be jeopardized (forward 
            planetary protection).
         •  The Earth must be protected from the potential 
            hazard posed by extraterrestrial matter carried by 
            a spacecraft returning from an interplanetary 
            mission (backward planetary protection).
                                                                       Protect Earth!
                                                                                                        Protect Mars and 
                                                                                                         the icy moons!
 28
          Planetary protection categories
          •   Five different planetary protection categories, in some cases with 
              subcategories, have been defined. 
          •   They reflect the level of interest and concern that contamination can 
              compromise actual and future studies on prebiotic chemistry and the 
              origin of life.
          •   The categories and associated requirements depend on the target body 
              (e.g. Moon, Mars, Europa, asteroids …), on the mission type (flyby, 
              orbiter, lander) and the mission goal (e.g. for Mars - with or without life 
              detection experiments).
                                                                                                                       Fotos: ESA/NASA
 29
      Planetary protection categories
                                                              Fotos: ESA/NASA
 30
          Planetary protection and organic contamination control
          •   Organic contamination in the context of planetary protection can be considered as any 
              terrestrial organic matter that could be mistaken for, or whose signal could overwhelm and 
              mask, an extraterrestrial organic signature.
          •   Specific requirements for organic contamination do not exist so far, although the COSPAR 
              PPP recommends an organic inventory. 
 31
     Typical PP requirements for category III orbiters (e.g. Mars)
       • Cleanroom assembly (ISO class 8 
         or better)
        Limitation on crash probability, OR
        Bioburden reduction
        Localisation of eventual crash impact
        Inventory of organic materials
                                                       Foto: ESA
 32
      Typical PP requirements for category IV landers (e.g. Mars)
       Category III +
       Bioburden reduction / active sterilization
        (levels depending on planet, explored
        regions, astrobiological investigations)
       Microbiological controls
       Cleanroom assembly with bioclean-
        liness controls
       Lander recontamination prevention
        (bioshield, HEPA filter)
                                                   Credit:NASA/JPL-Caltech/MSSS 
 33
      PP for lander missions to Mars – quantitative bioburden approach
      Maximal allowed bioburden for a Mars lander
      Category IVa 
         ≤ 300 bacterial spores*/m2  AND
               5
         ≤ 3.0 x 10 bacterial spores/entire 
         spacecraft/lander
      Category IVb and IVc 
         < 30 bacterial spores*/exposed surface
                                                  Bacillus pumilus spores
      *  All bioburden constraints are defined with respect to the number of aerobic microorganisms that survive a 
      heat shock of 80°C for 15 minutes (hereinafter “spores”) and are cultured on TSA or R2A at 32°C for 72 
      hours, i.e. the PP standard assay. 
 3434
       What to do and how?
        
       For ESA Missions - ECSS standards
       The European Cooperation for Space Standardization (ECSS) is an 
       initiative established to develop a coherent, single set of user-friendly 
       standards for use in all European space activities.
       Coordination and harmonisation with other space agencies
       ECSS-Q-U-ST-20C:  Planetary Protection
        
       ECSS-Q-ST-70-55C: Microbial examination of flight hardware and 
                          cleanrooms 
       ECSS-Q-ST-70-58C: Bioburden control of cleanrooms
       ECSS-Q-ST-70-53C: Materials and hardware compatibility tests for 
                          sterilisation processes
       ECSS-Q-ST-70-57C: Dry heat bioburden reduction for flight 
                          hardware
       ECSS-Q-ST-70-56C: Vapour phase bioburden reduction for flight 
                          hardware
 35
       Microbial sampling of spacecraft and cleanrooms
        ECSS-Q-ST-70-55C: Microbial examination of flight hardware 
        and cleanrooms
        •  Surface and air sampling and detection of biological 
           contaminants with swabs, wipes and air samplers, 
           followed by cultivation for bioburden* determination.
        •  Surface sampling of biological contaminants by DNA 
           analysis with swabs and wipes for biodiversity
           determination.
         
        *  Bioburden - quantity of viable microorganisms measured with a specified assay 
                → How many microbes are there?
        ** Biodiversity - identification of species of microorganisms measured with specified assays
                → Which microbes are there?
 36
       How to measure the bioburden on spacecraft and in cleanrooms?
       Surface sampling with swabs
                                           For areas up to 25 cm2
 37
      Bioburden analysis with the planetary protection standard assay
      Enumeration of aerobic mesophilic heat 
      tolerant spores and vegetative bacteria
                   Results after 72h of incubation
 38
       How to measure the bioburden on spacecraft and in cleanrooms?
       Surface sampling with wipes
       For areas up to 1 m2
       Analysis in analogy to the swab assays
 39
       Example - the ExoMars missions
        ExoMars 2016
         
        DLR + MedUni Graz:    908 assays (146 swabs, 
                              631 wipes, 131 air samples)
        TAS-I:                3236 assays
        →Dynamics of the cleanroom microbiome from the 
           first utilisation of the new cleanroom at TAS-I in 
           Turino until the final assembly of the spacecraft
         
        ExoMars Rosalind Franklin 2028
        DLR + MedUni Graz:    1440 assays 
                              (until end of 2025)
         
 40
      Microbial sampling of spacecraft and cleanrooms
 41
       Planetary protection of icy worlds – probabalistic approach
       For Icy Worlds the calculation of the probability of inadvertent contamination should include a 
       conservative estimate of poorly known parameters, and address the following factors, at a 
       minimum:
       • Bioburden at launch
       • Cruise survival for contaminating organisms
       • Organism survival in the radiation environment adjacent to Europa or Enceladus
       • Probability of landing on Europa or Enceladus
       • The mechanisms and timescales of transport to a Europan or Enceladan subsurface liquid 
         water environment
       • Organism survival and proliferation before, during, and after subsurface transfer 
       →For planetary protection of Icy Worlds, the only relevant organisms are those with the 
         potential to contaminate the subsurface oceans and multiply there. 
 4242
          Relevant microorganisms for planetary protection of Icy Worlds
          •   Relevant species are microorganisms that are able 
              to survive long periods of desiccation, exposure to 
              radiation, that are able to replicate at low 
              temperature under oligotrophic anaerobic conditions 
              in the presence of salts.
          •   The cultivation of relevant species in the lab, if 
              possible at all, can take very long periods of time. 
          •   This is not compatible with spacecraft assembly, 
              integration and testing activities on a routine basis 
              with thousands of assays. 
            →PPOSS* recommendations: 
               ... Investigate the desiccation and radiation 
               resistance of representative isolates from Icy World 
               analogue environments …
               *PPOSS supported by the European Commission Horizon 2020                          Rettberg et al., 2019, Astrobiology 19(8):951-974. 
               programme under Grant Agreement 687373                                                            doi: 10.1089/ast.
 4343
      Survival limits of psychrotolerant microorganisms with relevance 
      for planetary protection of the icy moons
       Psychrotolerant microorganisms, bacteria, archaea, fungi, isolated from extreme environments on 
       Earth such as the Canadian high arctic or spacecraft assembly facilities cleanrooms, were 
       investigated to understand whether Earth organisms can survive the travel through space and on 
       the icy moons and might pose a risk for planetary protection.
                     Zaccaria et al., Philos Trans A Math Phys Eng Sci 12 February 2026; 
                              https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2024.0435
 44
          Planetary protection requirements – ongoing activities
          •   Development and evaluation of new molecular 
              methods to complement the cultivation-based standard 
              assay
          •   Metagenomics methods for bioburden and biodiversity 
              analysis to identify relevant viable organisms present in 
              a cleanroom and on a spacecraft
          →Input into a probabilistic risk assessment model for 
              planetary protection
                − NASA: Multi-Mission Metagenomics Technology Development 
                    Workshop, January 2022
                − ESA: Planetary Protection requirements for future exploration 
                    missions: Assessing metagenomics methods for their inclusion in 
                    ESA standards, October 2023
                − NASA ESA Metagenomics in Spaceflight (hybrid), November 19 –
                    22, 2024
                − NASA ESA  Metagenomics in Spaceflight No. 2 (hybrid), 
                    November 2 - 6, 2026
 45
          COSPAR‘s principles and guidelines for human missions to Mars
           •  The intent of this planetary protection policy is the same whether a mission to Mars is conducted 
              robotically or with human explorers. 
           •  Accordingly, planetary protection goals should not be relaxed to accommodate a human mission 
              to Mars. Rather, they become even more directly relevant to such missions — even if specific 
              implementation requirements must differ.
           •  The greater capability of human explorers can contribute to the astrobiological exploration of 
              Mars only if human-associated contamination is controlled and understood. 
 46
       Planetary protection for human missions to Mars
                                       Ensure crew health
           Protect Earth                                                  Protect Mars
 4747
       We are living in a microbial world.
 48   Microbiome Introduction — VMI Bootcamp II 1.0 documentation (awbrooks19.github.io)
       The human microbiome
       • Many more bacteria and archaea in and on a human 
         body than own human cells
       • ~ 150 x more genes
       • ~5,000 species 
       • Most microbes are essential. A few can cause harm. 
       • Up to 1 kg pure microbial material in the gut
       • Excretion of about ~70 kg bacteria each year
       • As many microorganisms on the skin as there are 
         people on Earth
 4949
          Planetary protection for human missions to Mars
          •   Human spaceflight hardware leaks in nominal and 
              off-nominal operation (e.g. airlocks, space suits, 
              pressurised rovers). It will not be possible to work 
              on Mars within entirely closed systems.
          •   The introduction of a maintained temperate 
              terrestrial environment at the Martian surface 
              affords the opportunity for many more organisms (in 
              type and quantity) to escape into the Martian 
              environment. 
          •   Crew members exploring Mars will inevitably be 
              exposed to martian materials. 
 5050
                         Planetary protection knowledge gaps 
                              for human missions to Mars
          Natural transport of        Technology and              Microbial and 
               biological              operations for             human health 
           contamination on              biological                 monitoring
                 Mars                 contamination 
                                          control
        Summary of all workshop results in: Spry et al., 2024, Planetary Protection Knowledge Gap 
        Closure Enabling Crewed Missions to Mars, ASTROBIOLOGY Volume 24, Number 3, 2024, 
        DOI: 10.1089/ast.2023.009
         
 51
           Planetary Protection requirements
          •   limit the allowed bioburden of a 
              spacecraft
          •   have a major impact on mission design
          •   have a major impact on spacecraft 
              hardware and payload
                − material selection, design, assembly 
                   and integration, testing,
                   sterilisation strategies
          •   necessiates documentation, reviews, 
              management structures
          •   are implemented since the Viking                                                  Preparing of one the Viking landers 
              missions (1976)                                                                  for dry heat sterilization, Foto: NASA
          Further reading
          •   COSPAR Policy on Planetary Protection,  Space Research Today, no. 224, January 2026, 17-39
          •   Spry et al. (2024) Planetary Protection Knowledge Gap Closure Enabling Crewed Missions to 
              Mars, DOI: 10.1089/ast.2023.0092
          •   Doran et al. (2024) The COSPAR planetary protection policy for missions to Icy Worlds: A review 
              of history, current scientific knowledge, and future directions, DOI: 10.1016/j.lssr.2024.02.002
          •   Olsson-Francis et al. (2023) The COSPAR Planetary Protection Policy for robotic missions to 
              Mars: A review of current scientific knowledge and future perspectives, DOI: 
              10.1016/j.lssr.2022.12.001
          •   Zorzano et al. (2023) The COSPAR planetary protection requirements for space missions to 
              Venus, DOI: 10.1016/j.lssr.2023.02.001
          •   Rettberg et al. (2019) Biological Contamination Prevention for Outer Solar System Moons of 
              Astrobiological Interest: What Do We Need to Know? DOI: 10.1089/ast.2018.1996
          •   COSPAR: The International Planetary Protection Handbook (2019), DOI: 
              10.1016/j.srt.2019.09.001
 5353
                                                                         Open access
 54
        ESA Planetary Protection Course
                                                                                 October 2026, Stuttgart, Germany
           Introduction to Planetary Protection - Fraunhofer IPA                     The course is limited to 24 
                                                                                           participants. 
 55
         Things to remember!
         •   Planetary protection is about protecting science and the Earth.
         •   Planetary protection regulations are based on UN Outer Space Treaty.
         •   COSPAR maintains a planetary protection policy and associated 
             requirements to guide compliance with the UN Outer Space Treaty.
         •   Planetary protection categories and requirements are not cast in 
             stone and evolve over time as new information becomes available.
 56
     Thank your for your attention!
          COSPAR PPP - Special regions on Mars
          •   A Special Region is defined as a region within which terrestrial 
              organisms are likely to replicate. Any region which is interpreted to 
              have a high potential for the existence of extant martian life forms is 
              also defined as a Special Region.
          •   In the absence of specific information, no Special Regions are 
              currently identified on the basis of possible martian life forms. If and 
              when information becomes available on this subject, Special Regions 
              will be further defined on that basis. 
          •   Neither robotic systems nor human activities should contaminate 
              Special Regions on Mars. 
          •   Any pristine samples or sampling components from any 
              uncharacterized sites or Special Regions on Mars should be treated 
              according to current planetary protection Category V, restricted Earth 
              return, with the proper handling and testing protocols.
 58
      Special regions - environmental conditions for replication
      Given current understanding, the physical environmental parameters in terms of water activity and 
      temperature thresholds that must be satisfied at the same time to allow the replication of terrestrial 
      microorganisms are: 
      − Lower limit for water activity: 0.5 (includes a margin of ~0.13)
      − Lower limit for temperature: -28˚C (includes a margin of 10 °C)
      → Identification of special regions before planning a human mission
 59
      Special regions on Mars
 60                                                          From Spry et al., 2024
