           HUMAN SPACEFLIGHTOPERATIONS
            Stefan Neumann
            German Space Operations Center (GSOC)
            Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (DLR e.V.), Oberpfaffenhofen
 1
       Agenda
       1. Introduction
       2. The Crew – just another subsystem?
       3. The Flight Control Team
       4. How to conduct Operations
       5. The Crew and Mission Control
       6. Outlook for Artemis Missions
 2     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
              1. Introduction
 3           Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Opening Remark
       There is no one concept of Human Spaceflight Operations. But some basic 
       thoughts can be generalized.
       ISS operations is based on the heritage of former human spaceflight missions 
       and such it used as an operations model for this lecture and future crewed 
       missions.
 4     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
      ▪ Largest space object created by humanity 
      ▪ Size of about a soccer field and over 400t of mass
      ▪ Over 100 “visits” by other spacecrafts
      ▪ More than 1000 hours of extravehicular activities
      ▪ Start of construction 1998
      ▪ More than 25 years of continuous human presence
      ▪ Current plan is to decommission ISS in 2032 
 5      Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Columbus Module
      ▪ The Columbus Module is an ESA provided 
        habitable module of the ISS.
      ▪ Launched on Feb 7th in 2008 as part of the 
        Space Shuttle mission STS-122/1E
      ▪ Designed as a non-stand alone laboratory but 
        nowadays also provides a sleeping quarter and 
        an exercise device.
      ▪ Critical resources (power, external cooling, 
        habitable atmosphere, attitude control) is 
        provided by the ISS. 
 6     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
              2. The crew – just another subsystem?
 7           Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
         The Crew – just another subsystem?
         TCS                                                                       Crew
         (Thermal)                                                                 (Humans, Flight Surgeons, 
         EPDS                                                                      …)
         (Power)                                                                   ECLSS
                                                                                   (Life support)
         DMS                                                                       Stowage
         (Data)                                                                    (and waste management)
         COMMS                                                                     Logistics
         (Communications)                                                          (Food, cloths,…)
         MCS                                                                       EVA
         (Attitude, position, motion)                                              (Extravehicular Activities)
         Payload
         (Camera, antenna, telescope, …)
  8   Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
         The Crew – just another subsystem?
         Adaptations for crew…
                                                   TCS: Used to cool equipment and other subsystems
         TCS                                       ▪  Thermal control of the air, removal of metabolic heat
         (Thermal)                                 EPDS: Used to power equipment and other subsystems
         EPDS                                      ▪  Lights, operation of „private devices“, presence of power in 
         (Power)                                      an O2 enriched atmosphere is a fire hazard
                                                   DMS/COMMS: Used for TM and TC operations
         DMS                                       ▪  Crew can also command the station and see the telemetry via a 
         (Data)                                       dedicated laptop, four voice channels for verbal 
         COMMS                                        communications with the crew, several video channels to be 
                                                      able to observe crew / science activities or to provide external 
         (Communications)                             views
         MCS                                       MCS
         (Attitude, position, motion)              ▪ Thrusters, gyros, GPS, fuel is re-supplied by other 
                                                     space crafts
         Payload                                   Payload
         (Camera, antenna, telescope, …)           ▪ Exchange of payloads, Human as science subjects
  9   Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
         A human life is of inestimable value
         Crew                                   Everybody is trained to the hierarchy CREW – VEHICLE – MISSION 
         (Humans …)                             A seat in rescue vehicles (Soyuz / Dragon) is guaranteed for any 
         ECLSS                                  crew member at any time.
         (Life support)                         Extensive emergency drills conducted regularly between crew and 
                                                ground.
         Stowage                                Flight Surgeon and Psychologist are taking care of the crew, private 
         (and waste)                            conferences scheduled regularly
         Logistics                              Medical equipment available on board
                                                During development phase attempt to change all designs in a way 
         (Food, cloths, …)                      which minimizes the risk. If this is not possible, „operational hazard 
         EVA                                    control“ mechanisms have to be implemented.
         (being „outside“)                      Daily Exercises: Human body degrades in space. Countermeasures 
                                                are required
        Payload
        (Camera, antenna, telescope, …)
 10   Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
         Additional Subsystems  
                                                   Air temperature and humidity are controlled (interface with 
         Crew                                      TCS). Filters are removing particles. Air is actively 
                                                   circulated between (intermodule) and inside each 
         (Humans …)                                (intramodule) module. Optical smoke sensors integrated in 
         ECLSS                                     the air ducts, station wide alarm system and emergency 
         (Life support)                            response equipment. Water Recovery & Management 
         Stowage                                   (WRM) using dedicated racks (e.g. Life Support Rack).
         (and waste)
                                                   All items (tools, spares, consumables, …) used on board 
         Logistics                                 have to be stored. Waste removal by putting trash into a 
                                                   supply spacecraft and burn it in the upper atmosphere.
         (Food, cloths, …)
         EVA                                       The Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU) has to be a small, 
         (being „outside“)                         (almost) independent spacecraft.
         Payload
         (samples, hardware, …)                    Various set of science activities with crew as science 
 11                                                subject itself or crew to perform activities. 
      Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
              3. The Flight Control Team
 12          Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
         Col-CC is part of an international ISS ops network
                                                                                         Tsukuba
 13      Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       The European Flight Control “System”
 14    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        Columbus Control Center: 
        Responsible for system, payload and ground infrastructure
        Responsibilities
        ▪ Vehicle Subsystem 
          Control: TM&TC 
          operations, 
          TM analysis, planning
        ▪ Mission Management
        ▪ Coordination of all 
          European science 
          experiments 
        ▪ Operation of the 
          European ground 
          communication network 
          as a whole
        ▪ Coordination with 
          NASA Operations
 15   Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        Generic Flight Control Team Setup
      ▪ Flight Director is ultimately 
        responsible for operations.
      ▪ A team of Flight Controllers is in 
        charge of execution/support of 
        operations.
      ▪ Subsystems are mirrored into Flight 
        Control Positions.
      ▪ Other operational teams supporting                                                       Flight 
        operations (e.g. ground controllers,                                                    Control 
        on-line engineering support, remote                                                      Team
        science centers).                                                                  Operati    Offline-
      ▪ Backrooms, engineers and other                                                      onal      suppor
        teams provide off-line support.                                                     teams        t
 16     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
         NASA ISS Control Center – The Big Team
                                ISS FD          CAPCOM            OPSPLAN                EVA
                             Flight Director                        Planner              EVA
    Console Staffing
           24/7                 ETHOS               CIO              Pluto             TOPO
                              ECLSS, iTCS           ISO           Station LAN         Trajectory
       Crew working              ADCO            CRONUS              BME           PAO/VVO/RIO
            day                GNC, MCS         C&T, C&DH                             Interfaces
        As needed              SPARTAN              GC               OSO               ROBO
                               EPS, eTCS      Ground Systems      Struc&Mech          Robotics
 17      Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        ESA ISS Control Center – COL-CC
                                                                                                                 Based
                                                                                                               at COL-CC
                                                                                                               Not based
                                                                                                               at COL-CC
                                                               COSMO
                        STRATOS                          Struc&Mech, IFM, CSS
                        C&DH, C&T,                          based in Turino
                     ECLSS, EPS, TCS
                                                                                                   COL-EST
                   EUROCOM                                                 COMET                     PASO
                    „Capcom“                  COL FD                        Planner
                 based in Cologne           Flight Director
                                                                                                GC
                                                                                          Ground Systems
 18     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
              4. How to conduct operations
 19          Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
 20    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
 21    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
 22    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
 23    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        ISS operational concept
    ▪ “Flight Rules” define how to conduct ISS operations and provides the technical framework.
    ▪ Flight Rule B1-3 defines mission priorities: 1. Crew, 2. Vehicle, 3. Mission.
    ▪ Activities are executed according to the FRs and agreed on-board plans and procedures.
    ▪ Flight Rules documents pre-agreed decisions for off-nominal situations.
 24     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Ground Payload Operations
       ▪ ISS provides internal and external facilities for 
         science operations without crew involvement.
       ▪ Facilities are purely controlled by ground teams.
       ▪ Astronauts could be involved during initial 
         installation, science sample swaps and 
         maintenance activities.
 25    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Operational Procedures
        ▪ For all activities a dedicated step-
          by-step procedure is provided.
        ▪ Procedure development follows a 
          strict workflow involving various 
          groups (Safety, Engineering, 
          Operation Teams, Astronaut 
          Representatives, etc).
        ▪ Procedures follows a standardized
          nomenclature to ease execution.
 26    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Stowage
      ▪ Dedicated stowage activities are planned to un-
        /load docked spacecrafts.
      ▪ Choreography is developed by ground teams and 
        optimized for on-orbit execution.
      ▪ All items on the ISS have labels and barcodes as 
        identifier and are tracked within a dedicated 
        database with the current on-board location.
 27    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
               Handling off-nominal situations
            3 different categories of alarms on the ISS:
            -   Emergency (Fire, Depress, Toxic Atmosphere)
                    -    Requires immediate action from ground and crew
            -   Warning
                    -    Actions requires within 90min
                    -    If no actions are taken, it might create a crew safety issue or hardware 
                         damage.
            -   Cautions
                    -    No immediate action required
                    -    Mostly loss of functional redundancy
                            ➢ Automatic Failure Detection and Isolation Recovery (FDIR) is executed by the on-board software.
                            ➢ Situations have pre-agreed actions to safe crew and system.
                            ➢ Ground support is required for recovery, supporting crew and failure investigation.
  28           Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        Decision making in off-nominal cases
        ▪ ISS Commander:
            ▪ Directs on-board operations under the direction of the lead MCC (usually MCC-H).
            ▪ If unable to communicate with MCC or if specifically directed, is authorized to take any 
              action necessary for safety.
        ▪ Flight director: 
            ▪ Takes real time operational decisions based on guidelines, policy and current situation.
            ▪ Responsible for providing recommendations to Mission Management Team (MMT) when 
              operating outside of policy.
        ▪ Mission Management Team:
            ▪ Responsible for policy decisions not covered by operational documents (like Flight 
              Rules).
            ▪ Should be consulted when operations outside of policy are required.
 29     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
              5. Crew and Mission Control
 30          Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
             Ways of Communications
                                                                                                                  ▪ Main communication path for ISS is 
                                                                                                                      via NASA TDRS satellite system.
                                                                                                                  ▪ Two data channels with different 
                                                                                                                      bandwidth (S- and Ku-Band)
                                                DLR Ground                                                        ▪ 4 voice loops for spoken 
                                               Station Weilheim                                                       communication, 9 video channels 
                                                                                                                      and a high bandwidth data channel
                                                                                                                  ▪ Since 2021 a Ka-Antenna was 
                                                                                                                      installed outside of Columbus using 
                                                                                                                      the EDRS satellite system for an 
                                                                                                                      additional up- and downlink path.
                                                                                                                  ▪ VHF/amateur radio available for 
                                                                                                                      emergency or for public outreach.
 31          Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Voice and Video
                               Voice traffic is kept to a minimum 
                               (two „sync points“ per day).
                                         Several video cameras onboard
 32    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Timeline Preparation
    ▪ Preparation of the Timeline starts several month prior day of execution.
    ▪ Iterative and integrated effort of all ISS partners
    ▪ All activities have certain constraints (time-range constraint, hardware 
     constraints, resource constraints, …)
 33    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        „OPTIMIS VIEWER“ – Schedule for Astronauts and 
        Ground Teams
                                                                                     Key Features:
                                                                                     1. Day and Time
                                                                                     2. Crew activities
                                                                                     3. Ground activities
                                                                                     4. Satellite Communication Availability
                                                                                     5. Procedure Link
                                                                                     6. Short Crew Feedback / Note
 34     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Weekend activities
       - Monday to Friday are nominal working days
       - Low amount of planned activities over the 
         weekend
       - Housekeeping is done on the weekend
       - Conferences with families and friends
       - Personal activities 
 35    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Planning Constraints to protect Crew Health / Well-being
       ▪ Scheduling of 2.5 hours of sport each 
         day.
       ▪ On working days 6.5 hours of planned 
         work.
       ▪ If possible, midday break should be 
         aligned to have shared lunch break.
       ▪ Working time needs to be tracked for 
         compensation on other days.
       ▪ Private Conferences with families, 
         friends, surgeons
       ▪ Respecting personal crew preferences 
         (exercise in the morning/evening, cardio 
         before/after strength training, video 
         policy, …)
 36  Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       ESA Crew on the ISS: What is difference for us?
      ▪ An ESA astronaut does not work only for 
        ESA. 
      ▪ Closer contact to crew already prior 
        mission start. 
      ▪ Weekly crew conference with the 
        astronaut.
      ▪ More European public outreach events 
        and press events at the control center.
      ▪ National contributed Payloads: Payloads 
        financed by national space agencies for 
        dedicated astronaut mission.
 37    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Commercialization
       ▪ More and more commercial 
         entities are part of ISS 
         operations.
       ▪ External Platform Bartolomeo has 
         been installed in 2020.
       ▪ Smaller Experiment Cubes 
         (picture low right) for experiments 
         inside the ICE Cubes Facility.
       ▪ Commercialization changes the 
         requirements for Operations as 
         more flexibility is required.
 38    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Private Astronaut Missions (PAM)
       ▪ PAMs are occurring more frequently.
       ▪ Crew can be „Space Visitors“ but 
         also institutional astronauts.
       ▪ Two ESA astronauts flew with PAM 
         missions (Axiom 3 & 4).
       ▪ High intense, short mission with short 
         preparation time (for crew and 
         ground).
       ▪ PAM are an opportunity for smaller 
         countries to fly their astronauts.
 39    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
              6. Outlook for Artemis Mission
 40          Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        Outlook for Artemis Missions
        ▪ Lunar Gateway was a planned non-permanently crewed space station built by NASA, ESA, 
          JAXA, CSA & MBRSC.
        ▪ Operations for ESA´s Gateway operations has been delegated to COL-CC.
        ▪ NASA restructured its lunar architecture with a focus on direct lunar surface operations 
          including a lunar base and a pause of Lunar Gateway in its current form.
            ➢Evolution from COL-CC to Human Exploration Control Center (HECC) to continue 
              human spaceflight and exploration operations from Munich.
 41     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        Comparison of Operations
                       ISS operations                                 Artemis Missions
               Continuous crewed operations               Campaign mode with uncrewed timespans
           Console staffing: 24/7 around the year                24/7 during crewed missions,
                                                         low console staffing profile outside of crewed 
                                                                           missions
            Continuous planning cycle divided in          Structured by missions of about 2-4 weeks
                   increments of 6 months                       followed by uncrewed phased
               Main goal is science operations                Main goal is excursion to the Moon
                   High satellite coverage               Dependent on mission phase. High coverage 
                                                          during crewed phase, low coverage during 
                                                                       uncrewed phase
              Low level of on-board automation           High level of on-board automation especially 
                                                                    for uncrewed timespan.
 42     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
      Thanks for your attention!
                                                       Pizza day on the ISS
 43
              Questions?
 44          Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
       Literature
       1.  FLIGHT – My life in Mission Control, Ch. Kraft, Plume (2002).
       2.  Handbuch der Raumfahrttechnik, W. Ley, K. Wittmann, W. Hallmann (Hrg.), 
           Carl Hanser Verlag, 5. Auflage (2019).
       3.  Wie Columbus fliegen lernte, T. Uhlig, A. Nitsch, J. Kehr, Hanser Fachbuch, 1. 
           Auflage (2010).
       4.  First experience with realtime operations of the Columbus Module, D. Sabath, 
           D. Schulze-Varnholt, 59th International Astronautical Congress, IAC-08-B3.3.3, 
           Glasgow (2008). 
       5.  Spacecraft Operations, T. Uhlig, F. Sellmaier, M. Schmidhuber, 2nd Edition 
           Springer (2022).
 45    Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
        Contact
        ▪ Internet:
            ▪ http://www.dlr.de/rb/ 
            ▪ http://www.col-cc.de/
        ▪ Email:
            ▪ Stefan.Neumann@dlr.de
            ▪ Dieter.Sabath@dlr.de
 46     Vorlesung "Human Spaceflight Operations", TU München, Stefan Neumann
